Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor John Odling Smith. He's
Emeritus Research fellow at the Mansfield College at the
University of Oxford. And today we're talking about his
book Nic Construction How Life Contributes to its own
Evolution. So, Doctor Odling Smith, welcome to the show.
It's an honor to everyone. Thank you. So, you
start your book by talking about, uh, physics and
about life itself and the origin of life. So,
uh, tell us first about the second law of
thermodynamics. Why is it important in the context of
evolution?
Well, as far as I know, the first person
to uh draw attention to the relevance of the
laws of thermodynamics, and in particular the second law,
which states that entropy or disorder is always increasing
over time. Was a physicist, physicist Owen Schrodinger, and
he did so in a short book called What
Is Life that he published I think about 1944,
um. Schrodinger's point was that even the simplest organisms,
such as, say, a single-celled bacteria is incredibly complicated
relative to its surrounding environment. Put that another way,
it's so far out of thermodynamic equilibrium. With its
surrounding environment, that it wouldn't survive for milliseconds, it
would simply die if it couldn't oppose the second
law of thermodynamics, but without actually violating it. Um,
WHEN I first read Schrodinger, um, I thought he,
he really had a point, and I've been thinking
about it, uh, ever since, which is why I
took the opportunity of starting my new book, uh,
by considering the laws of thermodynamics and in particular.
The second law and how organisms actually have to
resist it to even achieve their more conventional fitness
goals of survival and reproduction.
And can we answer the question of what life
is and what distinguishes it from non-life?
Well, I think the difference between uh. Life and
inanimate systems, uh, is really that. Animates living life
have fitness goals, they have goals. Including the prior
goal of resisting the second law. Unanimous systems don't
have. Fitness goals, uh, uh, they, therefore they don't
actually have to oppose the second law of thermodynamics,
they just have to obey it. They don't have
the problem that life does of not even being
able to get started without resisting the second law.
I think that's probably the biggest point I would
make.
What does orthodox evolutionary theory have to say about
how life started on Earth and how evolution unfolds.
That's an interesting one, they um. It, I, in
my experience, um. Let's call them orthodox evolutionary biologists.
I I'm not particularly interested in the origin of
life question. I think they think it's um too
difficult in some ways, and they prefer to concentrate
on the more immediate uh problems of how the
mechanisms and process of evolution work, um. I think
they may be or we may be making a
mistake by not starting with the origin of life
question, because I think it's just possible that uh
the origin of life question may eventually throw light
on some of the ways in which evolution works,
which we miss if we don't start there. I
think it's a sort of contentious point, but um.
I, I think, uh, that's probably the best answer
I can give. I don't think orthodox evolutionary biologists
are really uh interested to start with in the
origin of our question.
And what are the fundamental properties of life? I
mean, are there any fundamental properties?
Well, I think the fundamental properties of life is
that uh all life are sort of active purposeful
systems uh that um. Have to oppose the second
law and then have to achieve their fitness goal
by their own activities. Uh, NON-LIFE doesn't have to
do that, as I've just said, it just has
to obey the second law, um. I think the
active purposeful agency. Of of uh organisms is fundamentally
different from inanimate systems. Uh, AND, uh, that's why
again I start with the, the fundamental goal. Of
opposing the second law. Put it another way, life
is the goal, all lives are goal seeking systems.
Everything in life is a goal seeking system and
inanimate systems are not.
What else is needed, if anything, beyond the known
laws of physics and chemistry to understand life?
Um, Again, this, it comes back to the realizing
that you're having to study active purposeful systems as
opposed to purposeless systems. I think the origin of
life is actually could also be thought of as
the origin of purpose purpose of systems and in
a way, therefore meaning on earth, um, and I
think I say that somewhere, um. Now, I think
that also means that we uh we'll probably talk
about some of this later, but it does mean
that you have to think of more than population
genetics, uh processes. When you're studying about evolution. So,
I mean, one we'll get to, I'm sure is
things like epigenetics, um, which you certainly don't have
to study as a physicist.
So you've already used this phrase a couple of
times before, but you say that living organisms are
active and purposeful systems. Can you can you explain
that, particularly what this purpose mean in this context?
Well, the purpose is to achieve. Your goals, you
know, the goals of life, which the with the
the goals of surviving and reproducing are recognized by
everybody, but the prior goal of opposing the second
law in order to achieve your fitness goals is
not. And um that's why I think I wanted
to start with that before going to the. The,
the conventional goals of survival and reproduction, but living
systems are goal-seeking systems, uh, versus inanimate systems which
are not. And I think that I repeatedly comes
back to that.
And uh let me ask you now about information,
which is something you also talk about in your
book. What does information mean in the context of
evolutionary biology?
OK. The, I think um the Where I would
answer that, I call the information needed by organisms
in evolution. Adaptive know-how. Uh, AND the, the purpose,
I mean, sorry, um, if organisms who achieve their
fitness goals, including their conventional goals of survival and
reproduction, um, they can only do so by harvesting
energy and matter resources from their environments, which means
they have to interact with their environments, which effectively
means they have to be a. Have adapted to
their environments at the phenotypic level in order to
uh harvest resources from them and dump their detritus
and so on. Um, COULD you ask the question
again? I'm sorry.
Yes, uh, I was asking you what information means
in the context.
Now, the, the, the, basically, uh, in order to
be adapted organisms have to be informed by the
processes of evolution, with the adaptive know-how to be
able to interact with their local environments in ways
that does allow them to harvest energy and matter
resources, and also, for that matter, to defend themselves
from threats in their environments. Uh, AND, um. I
think the basic job of evolution. At, at more
than one level actually, as we'll get to later,
is to inform organisms, that's what evolution does and
uh um. Yeah is that OK? Is that enough
of an answer? Mhm.
Yes. Uh, I, um, I have a follow up
to that. Why do living organisms need information and
what is the difference between physical resources and informational
resources?
Well, They have to have the know-how, what I
call the adaptive know-how. How to interact with their
environments in viable ways. Both to take resources from
their environments and for that matter dump their detritus
back in their environments, which leads to a sort
of net increase in entropy in their environments actually,
uh, which is, uh, we get to later when
we think about ecosystems, um. And uh They can't
do any of that without being informed by the
processes of evolution itself, um. It's, it's the, you
know, inanimate systems do not need to be informed
in the same way as all animate systems must
be.
And what are the different kinds of knowledge gaining
processes out there? I mean, what different kinds of
knowledge gaining processes do organisms have at their disposal?
Well, In my book, I eventually distinguished between the
primary information gaining processes of population genetics due to
the mechanisms of. OF a natural selection and. Uh,
THE inheritance of Information in Mendelian, what used to
be just Mendelian genes, it's it genetics which has
gone a bit beyond that now. But I also
go for two other levels uh of uh. What
I call supplementary evolutionary process, supplementary informing process if
you like, of individual developmental processes and uh sociocultural
processes in social animals, um, and above all in
us where. Well, sociocultural press has become very potent.
Right. So let's talk now about the primary theme
of your book, niche construction. So what is niche
construction?
OK. I define niche construction and have done for
years now as uh the process whereby active organisms
modify some of the natural selection pressures in their
environments in various ways, as well as uh. As
a sort of byproduct, probably modifying natural selection pressures
in the environments of other organisms in their shared
ecosystems. I ought to say something here which uh
I think in retrospect, I might have been better
to call my uh book. Niche construction and niche
destruction. Uh, HOW life contributes to its own evolution,
because the negative side of niche construction is, is
also very important. Um, IT'S sometimes called it negative
niche construction. Um, The way in which um Uh,
Organisms can, uh, you know. Increase uh disorder in
their environments and living byli really at the expense
of increasing entropy in their environments. It is a
part of the story of niche construction. After that,
I break, we break down um niche construction into
several different kinds, things like we distinguished, for example,
between relocational niche construction. And perturbation or niche construction,
as well as many other things. Relocation is if
you're in an environment which is not working for
you, it's possible for an animal at least to
go somewhere else to find a more favorable environments
relative to the phenotypic traits it already possesses. Um,
PERTURBATIONAL we think of in terms of altering something
in your environment to suit yourself, rather than to
have to respond to natural selections directly in your
environment. So it always involves the modification of natural
selection pressures in your own and each other's environments,
but in different ways.
And what functions does niche construction serve?
Well, I mean, that goes on from where I've
left off. I mean, for example, um there's such
a thing as opportunistic niche construction whereby Organisms who
already possess particular phenotypic traits, uh. May find a
new purpose, as it were, for uh uh something
uh a phenotype they already possess. They just use
it in a new way, maybe to gain a
different kind of resource or maybe to outcompete to
some rival. Um, OPPORTUNISTIC these construction is quite frequent.
Um, Another way is what we call counteractive niche
construction where uh if the environment changes. You do
something as a niche constructing organism to counteract the
niche the way the environment is changes and bring
it back as far as you can to a
more favorable state relative to the phenotypes you already
possess. Um, So it's all the time, it's turning
what uh is I could put crudely as a
sort of one way street relationship between organisms and
their environments, which is modeled by orthodox evolutionary theory
into a fundamentally two-way street relationship between niche construction
organisms and their naturally selecting environments. And it prein
introduces sorts of feedback, of course, which changes the
dynamics of more or less everything.
So in the context of niche construction, what does
adaptation mean? I mean, what does it mean in
the context of an adaptive interaction or adaptive interaction
niche relationships between organisms and their local external environments.
OK. That's, I think. It, it really means that
the. Um, INTERACTIONS between organisms and their environments, uh,
involve really a a kind of constant niche, active
niche management problem, almost on a moment by moment
basis. Organs are constantly having to adjust their relationship
with their environments and therefore with natural selection pressures
in their environments by their niche construction activities. And
uh it's a I give some examples in in
my book of where I think this goes on
and it it's kind of opens up an alternative
way of adapting to your environment. You can either
just respond to your natural selection pressures in your
environment, or you can try to modify selection pressures
in your environment, uh, in the ways I've just
been describing. So that your environment, you bring your
environment back to be more favorable to yourself by
the changes you cause in your environment. Um, Some
way I draw attention to two different categories of
natural selection environments as a result. Natural selection pressures
that arise from completely autonomous events in environments, but
versus another category of natural selection, which arises from
natural selection pressures that have previously been modified by
the active purposeful agency of organisms, either in your
own population or in other populations.
Uh, WHERE do the behaviors involved in niche construction
come from? Are they genetically encoded?
OK, to begin with, I think that inevitably yes,
I think you you you start with um. The
uh information you derive from the genes you inherit
from your parents, at the beginning of life as
it were. Um, BUT subsequently, um, it needn't be
so restricted. I mean, I think you can learn,
uh, for example, an individual development animal, uh, can
learn new tricks as it were, say through the
capacity of animals to learn and uh you can
uh develop new kinds of uh behaviors uh beyond
those that you inherited, you start with say a
repertoire. Of uh behaviors that you inherit from your
ancestors by your parents, as a member of your
individual population. After that, you may acquire additional. Uh,
YOU may add to your behavioral repertoire by say
animal learning. Again, when you move up to the
3rd level of sociocultural groups in, in animals, you
can of course get still more um behaviors or
be taught more behaviors really and so on, as
a member of your cultural group now and um
you you you and also via different kind of
inheritance systems. I mean, we, for example, we are
taught uh. Both formally and informally at school about
all sorts of things that add to our repertoire
of behaviors um at the cultural level too, particularly
in humans.
And in what ways do organisms co-evolve with their
environment?
Could you say that one again?
YES, in what ways do organisms co-evolve with their
environment?
Oh yes. Well, I think I've been talking about
this already, really, but. Um, Niche construction or if
all niche construction organism modify uh components of their
environment by their active purposeful niche construction activities. Then
of course they, they cause their environments uh to
change in response to their own niche construction activities.
Conversely, it's always also true that natural selection pressures
in their environments cause organisms to respond to natural
selection pressures, which means in effect, uh something that
uh. The biologist Nick Lewontin pointed out years ago
that organisms must necessarily be co-evolving with their environments
by this sort of two-way street interactions between niche
constructing organisms. And naturally selection pressures in their environments.
Um, So, the, I, I think, I think I
say in my book that evolutionary theory should not
really be just about the evolving, the evolution of
organisms in response to the environments, it's really about
how organisms and their environments co-evolve as a function
of their two-way street interactions. Between niche construction organisms
and naturally selecting environments.
In your book you also talk about ASB's control
theory and how the variable properties of organisms relate
to the variable properties of their environments. Could you
tell us about that?
I, I'll try to. I mean, Ashby was uh.
Um, Ross Ash Um, unfortunately there's several aspects around,
but he was an early, uh, control theorist that
used to be called cyber cybernetics. Um, AND he
came up with some very interesting things about how
self-controlling systems have to work, uh, which I think,
uh. HAVE quite a lot of implications for our
understanding of evolution. I mean, he, he, his first
idea was that a self-controlling system had to protect
an essential variable, which is essentially equal to the
achievement of some kind of uh of of goal,
uh, some kind of destination if you like. Um,
AND then they said he came up with something.
Which he called the law of requisite variety, or
LRV according to which organisms can uh. Uh, Protect
their essential variables really. And this responses to a
sort of endless game of of between the variants
that expressed by organisms, particularly the phenotypic variants expressed
by organisms. And the variances they encounter in the
environment in the form of variant natural selection pressures.
Um, AND They're constantly having to uh play this
game of variance, uh. Between the self uh controlling
system. And uh It's, it's environment. And um I
give some examples, a simple example of trying to
uh use the uh uh for example, I use
the um Example of a. A sailboat that you
control with the Things that are at you in
your own variants, variant sails, ropes, rudders, tillers and
everything else, versus the weather conditions and the sea
states and all the rest of it that you're
sailing through. And, uh, If you can't control. Uh,
You can't actually play counteract or drive down the
variance, which is another way that Ashby talks about
it. That you encounter in your environments by controlling
the variables that you have over some control over.
Then of course you probably lose your uh you
you you don't get to your destination, you can't
protect your man and you sort of run into
a rock or something if you're on a uh
sailing boat or something and you lose control. The
object of course is not to do that, it's
to arrive safely at the harbor there and everything,
uh, every self-controlling system is uh. Affected by Ashby's
comments about protecting an essential variable to reach your
destination and by playing this endless game of variance
with your environment. Between your own variants and the
variances thrown at you by your environment. It's a
it. It, it's actually a complex stuff and I
spent a lot of chapter 3 talking about it,
but I think I'll leave it at that for
the moment.
Right. Uh, JUST to illustrate what we are talking
about here when it comes to niche construction, could
you, uh, give us two or three examples of
niche construction behaviors in different organisms?
Example of knee construction. Um, WELL, I gave you
one already that if you'll find yourself in the
wrong. In an environment which is increasingly hostile to
you. Because of the natural selection of price. Per
your country in that place and space. It's possible
to move somewhere else, and of course uh. I
mean, uh, a particularly good example is, uh, seasonal
migration um in birds. I mean, there's many birds
in this country which uh uh. Take off before
the winter and fly all the way to Africa
or South Africa even, uh, to, but it's a
form of relocation at at considerable expense, but that's
niche construction, uh, and then they return the following
spring. Uh, AND start building nests, building nests, of
course, is also niche construction. If you build a
nest or build it, you know, build a dam,
I mean, one of the famous examples of niche
construction is the dams built by beavers to improve
their fishing really, um, and they change their environments
considerably and not only the environments of themselves, but
the whole sort of. Riparian ecosystems in which they
live, and so do many other organs, so they
inevitably change search and precious for other organisms too.
Um, SO those would be two salient examples of
niche construction, um. I mean, for me, uh, There
are just endless examples, but I hope that will
do for the moment.
Yes, in the book at a certain point you
mentioned two requirements of life, bioenergetics and bioinformatics. Could
you explain them and how they interact with one
another?
Well, the Energetics, I mean, I use bioenergetics, uh,
really more in an ecological sense than in his
usual metabolic sense most of the time. Um, BUT
the, uh, the close relationship really is that they
each depend on each other. Uh, The the uh
gaining of uh uh energy and matter resources depends
on adaptive know-how. But the adaptive know-how is supplied
by the processes of evolution. But the processes of
evolution have to be paid for. By the energy
and matter gained by organisms during their lives. I
mean an obvious thing there is, uh, if organisms
have offspring, uh. They have to pay To contribute
offspring to the next generation of their populations by
gaining sufficient energy and matter resources uh to build
their offspring and also not only their offspring, of
course, but to maintain their own selves and so
on. And uh. So The fundamental relationship between these
two different kinds of resources, which comes up endlessly
in my book. Is one of uh. Each needing
each other, and the dilemmas that go with that,
I mean some standard origin of life question was
which comes first, but almost everybody nowadays thinks for
that concept being what happened. What must have happened,
they must have come together in some way or
other. And uh so on, but I think that
this in in my chapter 8, I come up
with a set of rules about how these two
kinds of resources relate to each other and describe
them in in some detail. um. So I think
that's the basic answer to your question.
So let me ask you a little bit now
about ecosystems. What can, what can we learn about
the origin and evolution of ecosystems on Earth as
a function of the co-evolution of niche constructing organisms
with their environments?
OK. That's a big question. Um. The way I
approach this, I think I mainly devote chapter 8
to this in my book. Um, I start off
by considering, well, suppose you start off with uh
what I call a dead planet or a planet
in which there's no light. Um, What you find
there are flows of energy and matter, uh. Um,
On dead planets. So geochemical flows of energy and
matter, but that's it. As soon as life appears
on. A planet Uh, then you convert the flows
of just energy and matter into biogeochemical flows, uh,
and cycles that involve information as well as. Energy
and matter, the information in organisms. And the, the
biogeochemical flows uh are then responsible or They sort
of introduce the basic set of um relationships that
you find between organisms of different species or even
the same species in ecosystems, the, the classic ones
of competition, usually thought of as a minus minus
relationship. Mutualisms or cooperation plus plus relationships. And asymmetrical
relationships between say predators and preys or hosts and
parasites. Usually thought of as plus minus relationships, and
as the life builds up on the planet, so
those relationships so that uh get introduced and then
developed. And uh it also um there's something that's
interesting, which is different between conventional evolutionary biologists and
what I'm suggesting uh here too is, um. In
population community ecology, for example, it's relatively easy to.
Describe uh the co-evolution of different species of organisms,
uh, because each of the, the organisms in both
species all carry genes, so you can set up,
uh, population genetic models of covariation between different species
of organisms. But what you can't do really is
bring in anything to do with non-living abiota, which
are also components of ecosystems. Into that story, uh,
because of course it non-living systems don't have genes,
however, um. In the the the version of evolution
that I'm describing. Um, YOU can get the indirect
coevolution of two populations. Uh, VIA an intermediate non-living
abiotic systems, for example, this is a bit confused,
but if, if, if a population A niche constructs
in ways that modify an intermediate component in the
environment, which is non-living, and I call it Z.
Then the changes in Z may act as a
change selection pressure for another population, population B. In
effect, that leads to the co-evolution of population and
population B via an intermediate abiotic component, uh Z.
And that's the sort of thing that is introduced
when you realize the um. Organisms can can modify
abiotic components in the environment, non-living components, by their
niche construction activities in ways that subsequently change the
evolution of another population in their ecosystem, which I
think adds to uh ways in which we can
think about ecosystems, uh, and the relationship of ecosystems
through evolution uh in biology.
So is niche construction a way for organisms to
more actively participate in their own evolution?
Well, I think so, yes, um, um, in a
sense, if they start niche construction, as I in
ways I've just described, they are almost bound to
contribute to their own and each other's evolution by
also some of the ways I've I've just been
describing. Um, IT changes the process. Uh, TO repeat
from being just the story of the evolution of
organisms in response to natural selection process in their
environment to necessarily the co-evolution of organisms. With their
environments, where the environments of course to change too,
by the niche construction activities of organisms. So it
changes a lot. Mhm.
Is there space for any form of teleology here?
That um, that's a nice question. I mean, that
takes us back to Aristotle really, doesn't it? And
I do mention briefly, um. Uh, Aristotle's concept of
a final cause, which appears superficially to reverse the
arrow of time, as it were, uh. But Having
the effects before the cause, um, I don't think
that's really, I, I, I, I'm not an expert
on Aristotle. I'm not sure whether he would really
have meant that, um, but what I think it
does draw attention to is the capacity of organisms
to, uh, Deal with, use the histories of the
past, uh, which can be different kinds of histories
at these three different levels, you know, collective history
of your population at the genetic level, individual history
of yourself at your individual developmental level, and the
history of your. Uh A cultural group at the
3rd level. Um, Now, the The ways that all
these histories apply. Does allow for, you know, past,
present and future to interact and the interaction of
relative to the future. Does include the possibility of
anticipating your future, which of course is not the
same as teleology, but it can look like it
superficially, and I give the example say of um
a human athlete who uh. Wants to uh win
a gold medal at some future Olympic Games. And
anticipates that goal and therefore trains very hard here
and now to enable it to achieve an anticipated
goal in the future. Now that is, has sometimes
been called teleonomy rather than teleology and biology, but
it's not uh Aristotelian teleology. Um, IT it may
superficially look like it a bit, but it ain't
the same thing. Right.
So earlier, I asked you about information gaining processes
and one that you mentioned was developmental processes in
individual organisms. Could you tell us now. About social
and cultural processes in social animals, including humans, in
what ways are those kinds of processes also information
gaining processes?
Yes. The, the Sociocultural. Uh, INFORMATION gaining. I studied
by evolution, at any rate, some evolutionary biology under
the general heading of of of. Of uh The
co-evolution, gene culture co-evolution. And it's also a contentious
area in evolutionary biology. And the there's there's quite
a good start has already been made, but I
think there's a long way still to go as
we realize how information gained at the cultural level,
it can interact with um information gained, say, at
the population genetics level at level one. And um
I think it, I, the way I think of
it is that I think it makes sense to
consider, well, these additional processes of evolution at the
developmental level and the cultural level, probably wouldn't have
evolved in the first place unless they enhanced the
capacity of organisms for um adapting to their environments.
But uh it needn't always stay that way, which
is one of the points of interest. The there
is a possibility, because each information gaining process potentially
picks up different kinds of information, what I call
qualitatively different information. There is a possibility that uh
they may become antagonistic instead of uh mutually beneficial
uh at some stage. And the classical example of
this is when humans first went dairy farming, um,
and really discovered there was a new resource available,
namely milk that they could use from their cattle.
Except there was one problem. That all human babies,
for example, are obviously able to drink their mother's
milk because they're lactose tolerant. But they're not, they
lose their lactose tolerance as they grow older, which
meant that dairy farming communities found they had a
problem of digesting the milk that they took from
their cattle initially. That then led to a a
a relatively uh slow process whereby Drinking milk, modified
natural selection pressures at level one of population genetic
evolution. Which eventually took up the slack by uh
evolving lactose tolerance. In adults, as well as in
children and babies. And that was an interesting interaction
between the cultural processes at level 3 as we're
calling it. And the population genetic processes at level
one, which was initially antagonistic, but then set up
uh uh interactions between the two, which eventually led
to a restoration of adaptation by adults becoming lactose
tolerance as well, due to a change in, actually
I think in genetics and chromosome 2 as I
remember rightly. So that's why it can work. One
of the problems is you need time for that.
And uh if we change our environment so quickly.
At the cultural level as we are threatening to
do now, it may not grant you enough time
for the the population genetic level to make the
necessary adjustments to catch up with. Uh, LEVEL 3
changes, in which case we get what I sometimes
call an adaptive lag. Uh, AND which can be,
uh, potentially probably very dangerous. OK. Herself.
Yes, so talking about changing our environments too quickly,
how are humans currently contributing to the evolution of
life on Earth?
I'm not quite sure what you're getting at there.
Um, I've already been discussing some of the ways
in which I think it changes our understanding of
the evolution of life on Earth. Um, I, I
think the thing I've just given you is the,
uh, example whereby, uh, things can go wrong in
the interaction between these three different levels of information
gaining processes, you know, population genetics, individual development. And
sociocultural processes. Um, Oh. I'm not sure what I
can add to what I've already said.
Uh, I mean, the ways by which we are
affecting our environment through climate change, for example, isn't
that in some way, uh, affecting the evolution of
life on Earth. I mean, it was something
like
that
that last chapter. I don't, I think my question
in the last chapter how are humans contributing to
the evolution of life, and I think suggested that
they're actually um. We're facing, um, well I think
I say we're on the threshold of two alternative
futures really, a negative future and a positive future,
and the negative future takes the form of, uh,
a human induced. Another mass extinction. Of life on
Earth which we could do, I think in either
two ways which I discussed nuclear war. Or climate
change. Um, THE positive future really comes to the
point where humans. Begin to understand. That the processes
that put them together are for the first time
becoming. Aware of themselves in the if you like
in the self in the conscious minds of and
intelligence of humans. For the first time it's possible
for us to begin to understand. Um, THE processes
that have put us together. And I think that
carries the the. Responsibility of being both the custodians
of life on Earth, but it also raises the
daunting prospect that um through genome editing and other
things we may begin to influence the future evolution
of an awful lot of life on Earth. Um,
WE could start um. Uh, DIRECTING it and we,
we, unless we can understand the process of evolution
much better than we do at the moment, and
therefore understand our true relationship with the rest of
nature much better than we do at the moment.
The prospects of having to. Direct the future of
evolution of a lot of life on Earth are
appalling really, because we get it wrong, um. But
if on the other hand, we began to understand.
Uh, THE evolutionary process. Which was responsible for us
and all life on Earth. Much better than we
do at the moment. We might have a very
positive future. So I think that's a a a
rather messy way of answering your question.
Um, LET me ask you now, what do you
think about the proposal of an extended evolutionary synthesis
or going beyond the modern evolutionary synthesis? OK,
well, I really belong to a group that we,
I've been working with for many years now, in
which we've all been trying to uh extend the
modern synthesis or extend the evolutionary theory because we
think There's accumulating data, uh which are no longer
compatible with the what I call the core assumptions
of of the modern synthesis or nowadays most often
called neo-Darwinism. So I'm very sympathetic to the uh
efforts to extend uh the evolutionary theory by, I
think we call it the ESS sometimes, it's had
various names. um BUT I think it's, I think
it is a uh become a a a necessity.
And uh in this is where for example the
extra processes of epigenetics, for example, and uh of
animal learning, for example, the sociocultural processes all come
in and it'd be a much more inclusive theory
of evolution to bring all that together, um. And
I think the people working the extended synthesis, uh.
Uh, OF which I am a sort of member
of the team, as it were, um, are, are
going for this. By, by the way, that you,
you may know there's another book was published more
or less the same time as my book by
a lot of my colleagues called Evolution Evolving. It
was published by Princeton Press in September too, and
there they go into the additional processes involved in
the ESS in much more detail than I do
in my own book. Uh, BUT it would give
you a fuller answer to the question you're asking.
Mhm. But, uh, I mean, as a final question,
let me ask you then, apart from niche construction,
what other mechanisms or processes would need to be
added to orthodox evolutionary theory
that really a question I think I've already answered.
I, I, I mean, uh. Epigenetic processes, I, I
would start with because uh in a sense they
include something that. Uh, YOU know, the idea that
you could never, um. Acquired characteristics can never be
inherited. Turns out not to be wholly correct when
you introduce epi epigenetic processes and epigerms as as
well as genomes, and so on. And uh so
that would definitely be one and then um I
I would uh. Insist that animal learning is an
information gaining process in individual organisms. Whereby organisms, as
it were, inherit um something they learned from their
earlier experience for their later selves, which is a
rather weird way of looking, sort of internal inheritance
system. But they also gain uh the animal learning
is relevant to uh the evolutionary processes of of
animals. And then again, when one we've just been
discussing, uh, gene culture co-evolution, where there's a huge
amount of extra information gaining um due to uh
cultural processes. Uh, AND I, above all, of course,
the information gaining process of science, which is probably
the most potent. Form of information gaining of adaptive
know-ha and also I'm afraid of maladaptive know how,
like the capacity to make nuclear weapons, which is
probably not a good thing. Um, And but it's
been an extraordinary powerful form of information gaining, and
I, I go into the uh. Uh, WAYS in
which science works in one of my chapters, uh,
because it is another information gaining process of some
importance, considerable importance. So those would be the uh
things I would like to add. Uh, TO the,
to the scope of evolutionary theory, which is not
really covered by the modern synthesis sort of contemporary
neo-Darwinism.
Great. So the, so the book is again niche
Construction, how life contributes to its own evolution. I
will be leaving a link to it in the
description of the interview. And Doctor Odling Smith, thank
you so much again for taking the time to
come on the show. It's been a real pleasure
to talk with you.
Well, thank you for, thank you for all your
questions, and it's been interesting to talk to you.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alexandam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lennie, John Connors, Philip For Connolly. Then the Matter
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs called Holbrookfield governor Michael
Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnsergoro and Hal Herzognun
Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearauujurumen ro Diego Londono Correa. Yannick Punter
Darusmani Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary
Galman Sam of Zallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti Gabrielon
Corteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianeau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the
Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old
Erringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Gray Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Hubbert,
Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner,
Ursulauddinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levin,
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers.
These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden,
Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick
Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio
Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.